title: Book Review Darwin Economy by R. Frank
slug: pt-euro
timestamp: Nov 30 2012 20:01
categories: essays libwelfare english
author: Luis Pedro Coelho <luis@luispedro.org>
---

This is a book whose working title was *The Libertarian Welfare State*, which
is the name of my `upcoming book <http://luispedro.org/projects/libertarian-welfare>`__.

1. The most interesting part of the book is the importance of positional
consumption. The examples he keeps coming back to are not very good. He
mentions sports a lot, but this is a highly artificial setting where we do not
care about anything but position and there are many artificial restrictions
(if there was any general value of putting a ball through a hoop, we'd just use
a staircase instead of relying on really tall people practicing for years on
how to do it in a jumping motion). Similarly, school districts are so important
because public policy decided that you must pay taxes to fund schools, but
those will be tied to your address. The obvious alternative is a school-voucher
system that travels across district boundaries.

The general mechanism is sound, however.

The author also avoids a common mistake in discussing positional consumption
which is to think that it matters what people who are very different from us
have. All envy is local (or *a rich man is he who makes more than his
brother-in-law*). The idea of consumption cascades (I want more than my
brother-in-law who wants more than his neighbour, ....) is more plausible and
is based on local comparisions.

As `Bryan Caplan <http://econlog.econlib.org/authorbcaplan.html>`__ asked (in a
tweet), it is interesting, though, that R. Frank misses the single biggest
positional item in modern society: higher education.

2. The whole book suffers terribly from the *curious asymmetry* where even
smart left-wingers think that they arguing against extreme-libertarian
positions is enough (it is a curious asymmetry because the argument that the
free-market is good because the alternative is the Gulag is, correctly,
confined to talk radio and other havens of stupidity; but I very much doubt
that Robert Frank sees himself, or is seen, as sort of the liberal equivalent
of Glenn Beck).

Around pages 123 (nook edition), the author discusses two men, Rand and Paul
(yes, really). Rand earns twice as much as Paul does. After setting up an
example, Frank argues how a head tax (i.e., each paying the same) would not be
ideal and, therefore, we need a progressive tax system.

The problem is that everyone to the left of Murray Rothbard agrees that Rand
should pay more than Paul. Even flat tax advocates say that Rand should pay
more. They will just argue that they should pay the same percentage of their
income.

And even this is not true, almost all flat tax proposals carry an exemption, so
that Rand **would pay a higher percentage of his income than Paul would**. To
see how this works: imagine a 30% tax with a 10k exemption. If Rand earns 80k,
he pays 30% of 70k, i.e., 21k, or 26% of his income. Paul earns 40k and pays
30% of 30k, i.e., 9k or 22% of his income.

Every tax plan ever proposed by any serious person in the last 50 years has had
Rand paying more and even a higher percentage of his income than Paul does. But
Robert Frank wastes pages arguing against a position that nobody to the left of
Murray Rothbard actually holds.

3. Frank also sometimes confuses a purely Potlach competition of wasteful
spending with competition with positive spill-overs (including to one self). In
one of the chapters, he argues that a young couple will be tempted to save less
than they would really like to because they are pressured to buy a house in a
nice neigbourhood so that their kids go to a better school.

This sounds plausible. However, while buying a house is often a bad investment
on finantial terms, it is often great in behavioral terms: people will cut
their savings first, their mortgages last.

And a couple who struggles to pay a higher-than-they'd-like mortgage in their
30s so their kids can go to the fancy Montesorri school, will be able to sell
this position (to the next generation) in their 60s. Yes, some neighbourhoods
come up and come down, but they generally don't lose all their value. In fact,
if I wanted to design a saving scheme for 30-year-olds with kids, tying it to a
good school for their kids would actually be the way to go. Not that I want to
do this (I find it a too disturbingly paternalistic: "if you want your kids to
go to a nice school, you need to save for your retirement"), but it makes
behavioral sense.

