title: Surprising Prediction #3
slug: surprising-3
timestamp: 01 May 2013 13:07
categories: ecume english
author: Luis Pedro Coelho <luis@luispedro.org>
---

**Men's Rights Will be Taken Seriously Within the Decade**

This is my iffier prediction.

It fundamentally has the same structure as the other predictions: here is an
assumption that is widely held without a very logical background. There is
increasing tension in the society between the reality and the politically
correct, so it is possible to see a sudden flip.

1. In the younger generation, men are the beneficiaries of affirmative action.
Without any real data behind this, I think that it in many university campuses,
*the modal beneficiary of affirmative action is a white male.* By this I mean,
that if you made a list of all of the people who are only there because of
affirmative action (compared to those who would have gotten in on a
race-&-gender blind evalution), your list would include more white males than
any other group (maybe black males do get a bigger boost on their test scores,
but there are just fewer of them).

(If it is true that more white males benefit from affirmative action than any
other group, does this change your moral evaluation of affirmative action?).

2. Young single women already make more money that young single men.

3. Mainstream publications have been moving towards paying attention to men's
rights for a few years. Slowly, but surely.

The Atlantic is at the forefront of that movement. In the last two years, there was a cover `The End of Men <http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2010/07/the-end-of-men/308135/>`__ and repeated articles about men doing badly. The one classically feminist article that made a splash `Why Women Still Can't Have it All <http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2012/07/why-women-still-cant-have-it-all/309020/>`__ was written by someone of an older generation, while the equivalent break-away-article on women problems from a younger female writer was partially a complaint that `men are doing badly and so make bad partners <http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2011/11/all-the-single-ladies/308654/>`__.

In the `donglegate
<http://www.wired.com/opinion/2013/03/richards-affair-and-misogyny-in-tech/>`__
kerfuffle, I noticed that several writers felt they needed to respond to men
rights groups. They did so disparagingly, but they did so. And this is what
matters.

4. In personal conversations, I repeatedly observe that people (both men and
women) will acknowledge the tension between what they are supposed to say and
what they truly observe.

The generation gap is also obvious in this respect.

4. I am not saying that men right movements will be fÃªted at parties. But
neither are feminists!

To their constant amazement, most feminist find that most women are not
feminists. Women will say things like "well, I'm not a feminist, but I do think
that it is clear that this rule is not good for women and should be changed."

5. "But men's rights movements are just a bunch of sexually deprived
emotionally underdeveloped men who are crying that nobody gives them the world
on a platter." "Sure, the justice system punishes men more heavily than women:
they are the ones who are genetically predisposed to commit crimes. Male rape
in prisons, who cares?" "Yes, men drop out of school more than women, but they
are not suited for studying."

All of these complaints sound so much like anti-feminist speech that it
actually convinces me that they could be the next feminists.

*

An unrelated subject is whether I think that men's rights groups are right to
gripe about men being victims. My answer is mostly focused on American society
(I could comment on a few European societies, but I don't think it makes sense
to discuss an "European" answer to this question).

I think that men are routinely harmed as men and women are routinely harmed as
women. Or did you think that there can only be a group that faces injustice?

In general, my opinion is that in the college-degree class, then men are
still favored. A lot. In fact, the higher up you go, the more you see a
pro-male bias.  In my personal experience, I benefit the most from male
privilege in leadership situations: I will often get deferred to as the man if
I have to argue my point with a woman in a situation where the decision is
mostly about arbitrary preferences. There are other subtler forms of privilege
some of which I surely don't even notice, this one is obvious.

The situations where I feel disadvantaged all have to do with children
(especially other people's children, they mistrust men much more than women).
On the other hand, I also get a big boost every time I do the slightest little
thing children-wise, whereas it is expected that women will do 100 time more.
Case in point: a few times I stayed with our then-baby daughter while my wife
was in another city for work; many people were really impressed with this. Now,
my wife stays with our daughter alone 3 or 4 nights a week because our careers
are in close-by-but-different cites; everybody thinks it is a convenient
compromise for all our interests.

If you're elite, you'll live in a patriarchical society which accepts more
women than men in its midst.

In the non-college-degree class, women are, on balanced, favored (college
degree being the big distinction between the two classes of American society).
In fact, one of the big ways in which men are discriminated against is that the
educational system gives them less. Then we socially penalize men with
non-elite non-manly jobs. The penal system is harder on men and there are fewer
and fewer opportunities to recover from a few youthful mistakes if they
resulted in criminal action.

